# Combat Danger
* * *
Whether it's a small group of goblins at level 2, an adult dragon at level 10 or Tiamat, The Chromatic Queen at level 20, fighting enemies is an integral part to a large amount of games of D&D 5e. So how do you keep combat interesting throughout your campaign or at different levels of play?

One of the first things I saw when preparing to DM was a video explaining the necessity of character deaths, and within the video it was explained that a combat is not fun when the players are obliterating the monsters. If there is not an element of danger within combat, or the risk that a PC may die, then what was the point in running the combat in the first place? Being one of my first lessons in DMing, this advice has stuck with me throughout my games, but it does come with its own nuances and obstacles to work around.

Firstly, if every combat is a deadly encounter as described or calculated by the CR mechanics (DMG, pg 82) then a certain element of the fun is taken away. A deadly encounter should occur every now and again to keep your players on their toes, but danger and character death can also be achieved by a combination of easy, medium or hard encounters spread throughout an adventuring day. The party can use a few short rests, but most spellcasters won't regain spells and there's only so many hit dice that can be used, so resource management will become a key part of the adventure for them, making future encounters that tad more difficult and ramping the danger as more and more encounters come along. Now this is not to say that every day should be twelve encounters long, as this is not only difficult to prepare without repeating combats, but also incredibly tedious for all involved. But a dungeon delve or cave dive will often provide great opportunities for these.

Secondly, it should not feel like combat has to be against extremely dangerous foes in a 5 versus 1 to be fun. You can incorporate monsters into different scenarios and environments to up the enjoyment level. For example, the party need to retrieve a treasure or artefact from a difficult location like on a cliff or in the deep ocean, or they are in a puzzle room and are trying to solve a difficult puzzle to open the secret door and escape the trap. These scenarios are somewhat difficult in their own right and require different skill checks and challenges to be passed in order to finish them and achieve their final goal. But imagine the party are trying to traverse a shattered staircase around a cylindrical room, requiring a series of tough athletics or acrobatics checks to be performed, as well as some buttons on the bottom floor being pressed to extend the slabs to stand on. Anyone can press a button, but what if the button pressers were being harrassed by the minions that guard the treasure at the top, only to be stopped when the artefact is gathered and the magic shut off. The minions don't have to be high-damage, high-health bosses, they could just be basic zombies or oozes. But not only does it add a sense of urgency to the puzzle, but also gives any character not trying to make the climb a purpose to achieve beyond saying "I press the button again".

Lastly, there doesn't have to be danger to the party for the combat to be scary. In urban settings, the party are surrounded by collatoral damage. So when the goblins invade and start harrassing and murdering townsfolk, most good aligned characters are bound to spring into the encounter. Every action becomes meticulously calculated to destroy all the enemies whilst also saving as many townfolk as possible. AoE spells are either carefully placed or are disregarded entirely as to not cause additional harm to the 4 hp townsfolk or their homes. Healing spells and effects are turned to the downed townsfolk instead of the rogue with silly plans. As a success, the party are the saviours of this part of the town or city, or maybe to the city as a whole. However, when all the monsters are defeated but the party are surrounded by the ashes of the civilians killed in a fireball, guilt sets in as well as repercussions of their actions, leading to many amazing roleplay opportunities.

These are just a few ways to enhance your combat encounters, making them enjoyable and fun without putting your party in complete danger every single time. But do remember that a character death every now and again can remind your players that while this may be fantasy, they aren't invincible ;).
