# Traps
* * *

Everyone loves the Indiana Jones scene where he's running away from a boulder rolling down the slope behind him, the sense of adrenaline and impending doom as it slowly catches up with him really makes the audience hang on the end of their seats. But think of all the smaller traps he also evaded: poison darts, snake pits, spikes, swinging axes. All these traps he dodged were sure to cause instant death to any normal human. But with the combination of high fantasy and magic, how do traps in D&D work, and how do you keep them fun in your games?

## Trap types
With the introduction of magic, a question to be asked when wanting to include a trap inside one of your game is what kind of trap are you wanting to include, which often comes with the consideration of it's "power level". The type of trap you choose can affect whether there is damage dealt at all, a condition effect or even an alarm system. These traps also need to be kept in line with the theme of your campaigns. In high magic campaigns, there are going to lots of mages trying to protect their hoard, so would use spells such as *glyph of warding* or *symbol*. However, in a low magic campaign, only those with extreme power are going to have access to these glyphs, so many prefer the good old methods of strings taut 6 inches off the floor and an arrow trap. It's up to you as a DM to decide what kind of enemies your party are going to face and thus what kind of traps these enemies would have, but you can also keep in consideration that some creatures notice these traps when inhabiting a new dungeon, and decide to keep it for unwelcome visitors.

## Trap damage
 For example, a small poison trap for your level 2 group is going to vastly differ to the poison trap for your level 16 party. In the DMG (Page 121), there are handy tables you can use to help determine the save DCs or attack bonuses of the trap, as well how much damage the trap should roughly do to the players based on three damage levels; setback, dangerous and deadly. A setback trap is your typical trap used within a dungeon. The dungeon probably has enemies so the trap is just a slow chip away at your players' health totals before the proper fight with the incentive of using their brains to figure out a way round it. A dangerous trap is most likely for when the boss has a trap or two in their lair and want to show the players that they mean business. A deadly trap has a high chance, if not the intention, of killing the players. Use this as a warning for the level 2 characters to not look into the archmage's secret chest.
 
 ## Homebrew Traps
 On pages 122 and 123 in the DMG, there are a list of sample traps of different complexities, ranging from the a variety of pit traps to fire breathing statues and the dreaded sphere of annihilation. Yet sometimes you, as a DM, have that one idea that you want to implement where there isn't an exact trap listed already. This is sometimes daunting but is actually a great headspace to be in, as a specifically themed trap is going to excite your players more than a generic trap. For this I would suggest using the tables mentioned above to determine a save/attack bonus and a damage. Then flavour the trap to be whatever you want it to be, but keep a clear idea written down or static in your mind as to what triggers the trap and how to spot and/or disarm it, as changing this may confuse your players.
